README.md, before:

# Cross-compiling go + gtk4 for Raspberry Pi

## Background

This repository supports GTK-based golang applications for the Raspberry Pi. Building the go gtk4 bindings (from <https://github.com/diamondburned/gotk4>) ended up using more RAM than my Pi's 1GB. This set of Docker images builds on <https://github.com/tonistiigi/xx> to cross-compile from a host machine (in my case, my MacBook Pro) to the Pi.

It supports both 32-bit (`armhf`) and 64-bit (`arm64`) ARM builds. It should be possible to get other platforms to work too, with some minor tweaks.

## Prerequisites

Stating the obvious, you'll need [Docker](https://www.docker.com/products/docker-desktop/).

## Supported CPUs/OSs

Out-of-the-box, the currently supported platforms are `linux/armhf` and `linux/arm64` on Alpine Linux 3.19 and Debian Bookworm. The system is designed to be flexible, so other OSs are supported by following the detailed instructions. (Send a PR to incorporate the support into the mainline?)

## Simple approach

If you just want to build an application that relies on these Docker images, then invoke the build script specifying your platform (i.e. CPU and OS combination):

```sh
cd alpine-cross-compile
./build.sh CPU OS
```

where:

* CPU is either `armhf` or `arm64`
* OS is one of `alpine3.19` or `bookworm`

If you don't specify a platform, it will build for all four combinations of (`linux/armhf`,`linux/arm64`)x(Alpine 3.19,Debian Bookworm) platforms.

Expect this to take a while: building the GTK4 bindings takes 15-20 minutes per-platform on an M1 Max MacBook Pro.

(Other versions of Alpine - e.g. `alpine3.18` or `alpine3.20` - should work, as should newer Debian releases, provided that the base image exists in <https://hub.docker.com/_/golang>. However, note that Bullseye (Debian 11) does not include gtk4 as an installable package, and so would require much more effort to get working.)

Docker images `go-cross-builder-OS-CPU` and `gotk-cross-builder-OS-CPU` will be created.

## Detailed instructions

If the simple approach doesn't work for you - e.g. because you want to build an unsupported combination of CPU and OS - then it's probably possible, by passing additional arguments to the build script.

```sh
cd alpine-cross-compile
./build.sh PLATFORM OSNAME GOLANGBASEIMAGE TAGSUFFIX
```

where:

* PLATFORM is the platform name as Docker recognises it (e.g. `linux/armhf`)
* OSNAME is such that builder-image/OSNAME_setup.sh exists (e.g. `alpine`)
* GOLANGBASEIMAGE is one of the golang base images, e.g. golang:1.22.0-alpine3.19
* TAGSUFFIX is a string to append to cross-builder image tags. It can be anything at all, but using a different tag suffix for different combinations of CPU/OS enables multiple cross-builder images to be installed at the same time.

Docker images `go-cross-builder-TAGSUFFIX` and `gotk-cross-builder-TAGSUFFIX` will be created.

## Using the Docker images

The image containing the gotk libraries is probably the image you want to use. There is a shell script in the Debian image that sets up the environment for cross-compiling, and you may need to explicitly include that in your scripts.

So, a typical usage is to have a build script that reads that environment script if it exists (because it's not needed for Alpine Linux), and then perform a go build as normal:

```sh
#! /bin/sh
[ -f /etc/profile.d/go_cross.sh ] && . /etc/profile.d/go_cross.sh

go mod tidy
go build .
```

The Docker command-line to perform the build is then:

```sh
docker run -it --rm -v .:/go/src -w /go/src gotk-cross-builder-bookworm-arm64 ./build.sh
```

(changing `gotk-cross-builder-bookworm-arm64` for whichever particular platform you want to build for)

## Notes for developers

This repo contains two directories: one that's a generic cross-builder, and one that incorporates the GTK bindings.

1. `builder-image`
    * This is just a thin veneer over tonistiigi's xx to tailor it to the specific OS, and to install some basic OS-level packages.
    * Usage:

      ```sh
      cd builder-image
      docker build --platform $PLATFORM --build-arg OSNAME=$OSNAME --build-arg BASE_IMAGE=$BASE_IMAGE -t $CROSS_BUILDER_TAG .
      ```

      The file `OSNAME_setup.sh` must exist in the `builder-image` directory; currently, alpine and debian exist.

    * There's also a 'hello world' in this directory, to allow you to check that cross-compiling is working after you've built the Docker image:

      ```sh
      cd builder-image/hello
      docker run -it --rm -v ./:/go/src -w /go/src $CROSS_BUILDER_TAG go build -o hello hello.go
      ```

      then scp the resulting binary (`hello`) to the target platform, run it and check it prints `Hello world`.

2. `gtk-image`
    * This installs the GTK4 libraries (and prerequisites) and builds the `gotk4` bindings
    * There are significant differences between the Alpine and Debian build steps, and there are therefore different Dockerfiles for the different operating systems.
    * Usage:

      ```sh
      cd gtk-image
      docker build --platform $PLATFORM --build-arg CROSS_BUILDER=$CROSS_BUILDER_TAG -t $GTK_BUILDER_TAG -f Dockerfile_OSNAME .
      ```

    * This directory also contains a hello world, demonstrating the go/GTK4 bindings:

      ```sh
      cd gtk-image/gtkdemo
      docker run -it --rm -v ./:/go/src -w /go/src -e HOST=macOS $GTK_BUILDER_TAG ./build.sh
      ```

## FAQ

### The gotk bindings are rebuilt every time I build my application

Check the version of gotk in `gtk-image` against the version used in your application: if they use a different version, then the bindings will need to be rebuilt for your application, and the results of that build will be lost when the Docker image exits. Change the version in `gtk-image` and rebuild the Docker image (and test it using the `gtkdemo` application). It'd be great if you send a PR or let me know if there's a newer version of the gotk bindings than is used in this repo.

## References

As well as the repositories referenced above, the following sources proved useful along the way:

* <https://stackoverflow.com/a/76440207/13220928>
* <https://medium.com/@tonistiigi/faster-multi-platform-builds-dockerfile-cross-compilation-guide-part-1-ec087c719eaf>

Commit message:

Add a FAQ about the problem of rebuilding an application every time

README.md, after:

# Cross-compiling go + gtk4 for Raspberry Pi

## Background

This repository supports GTK-based golang applications for the Raspberry Pi. Building the go gtk4 bindings (from <https://github.com/diamondburned/gotk4>) ended up using more RAM than my Pi's 1GB. This set of Docker images builds on <https://github.com/tonistiigi/xx> to cross-compile from a host machine (in my case, my MacBook Pro) to the Pi.

It supports both 32-bit (`armhf`) and 64-bit (`arm64`) ARM builds. It should be possible to get other platforms to work too, with some minor tweaks.

## Prerequisites

Stating the obvious, you'll need [Docker](https://www.docker.com/products/docker-desktop/).

## Supported CPUs/OSs

Out-of-the-box, the currently supported platforms are `linux/armhf` and `linux/arm64` on Alpine Linux 3.19 and Debian Bookworm. The system is designed to be flexible, so other OSs are supported by following the detailed instructions. (Send a PR to incorporate the support into the mainline?)

## Simple approach

If you just want to build an application that relies on these Docker images, then invoke the build script specifying your platform (i.e. CPU and OS combination):

```sh
cd alpine-cross-compile
./build.sh CPU OS
```

where:

* CPU is either `armhf` or `arm64`
* OS is one of `alpine3.19` or `bookworm`

If you don't specify a platform, it will build for all four combinations of (`linux/armhf`,`linux/arm64`)x(Alpine 3.19,Debian Bookworm) platforms.

Expect this to take a while: building the GTK4 bindings takes 15-20 minutes per-platform on an M1 Max MacBook Pro.

(Other versions of Alpine - e.g. `alpine3.18` or `alpine3.20` - should work, as should newer Debian releases, provided that the base image exists in <https://hub.docker.com/_/golang>. However, note that Bullseye (Debian 11) does not include gtk4 as an installable package, and so would require much more effort to get working.)

Docker images `go-cross-builder-OS-CPU` and `gotk-cross-builder-OS-CPU` will be created.

## Detailed instructions

If the simple approach doesn't work for you - e.g. because you want to build an unsupported combination of CPU and OS - then it's probably possible, by passing additional arguments to the build script.

```sh
cd alpine-cross-compile
./build.sh PLATFORM OSNAME GOLANGBASEIMAGE TAGSUFFIX
```

where:

* PLATFORM is the platform name as Docker recognises it (e.g. `linux/armhf`)
* OSNAME is such that builder-image/OSNAME_setup.sh exists (e.g. `alpine`)
* GOLANGBASEIMAGE is one of the golang base images, e.g. golang:1.22.0-alpine3.19
* TAGSUFFIX is a string to append to cross-builder image tags. It can be anything at all, but using a different tag suffix for different combinations of CPU/OS enables multiple cross-builder images to be installed at the same time.

Docker images `go-cross-builder-TAGSUFFIX` and `gotk-cross-builder-TAGSUFFIX` will be created.

## Using the Docker images

The image containing the gotk libraries is probably the image you want to use. There is a shell script in the Debian image that sets up the environment for cross-compiling, and you may need to explicitly include that in your scripts.

So, a typical usage is to have a build script that reads that environment script if it exists (because it's not needed for Alpine Linux), and then perform a go build as normal:

```sh
#! /bin/sh
[ -f /etc/profile.d/go_cross.sh ] && . /etc/profile.d/go_cross.sh

go mod tidy
go build .
```

The Docker command-line to perform the build is then:

```sh
docker run -it --rm -v .:/go/src -w /go/src gotk-cross-builder-bookworm-arm64 ./build.sh
```

(changing `gotk-cross-builder-bookworm-arm64` for whichever particular platform you want to build for)

## Notes for developers

This repo contains two directories: one that's a generic cross-builder, and one that incorporates the GTK bindings.

1. `builder-image`
    * This is just a thin veneer over tonistiigi's xx to tailor it to the specific OS, and to install some basic OS-level packages.
    * Usage:

      ```sh
      cd builder-image
      docker build --platform $PLATFORM --build-arg OSNAME=$OSNAME --build-arg BASE_IMAGE=$BASE_IMAGE -t $CROSS_BUILDER_TAG .
      ```

      The file `OSNAME_setup.sh` must exist in the `builder-image` directory; currently, alpine and debian exist.

    * There's also a 'hello world' in this directory, to allow you to check that cross-compiling is working after you've built the Docker image:

      ```sh
      cd builder-image/hello
      docker run -it --rm -v ./:/go/src -w /go/src $CROSS_BUILDER_TAG go build -o hello hello.go
      ```

      then scp the resulting binary (`hello`) to the target platform, run it and check it prints `Hello world`.

2. `gtk-image`
    * This installs the GTK4 libraries (and prerequisites) and builds the `gotk4` bindings
    * There are significant differences between the Alpine and Debian build steps, and there are therefore different Dockerfiles for the different operating systems.
    * Usage:

      ```sh
      cd gtk-image
      docker build --platform $PLATFORM --build-arg CROSS_BUILDER=$CROSS_BUILDER_TAG -t $GTK_BUILDER_TAG -f Dockerfile_OSNAME .
      ```

    * This directory also contains a hello world, demonstrating the go/GTK4 bindings:

      ```sh
      cd gtk-image/gtkdemo
      docker run -it --rm -v ./:/go/src -w /go/src -e HOST=macOS $GTK_BUILDER_TAG ./build.sh
      ```

## FAQ

### The gotk bindings are rebuilt every time I build my application

Check the version of gotk in `gtk-image` against the version used in your application: if they use a different version, then the bindings will need to be rebuilt for your application, and the results of that build will be lost when the Docker image exits. Change the version in `gtk-image` and rebuild the Docker image (and test it using the `gtkdemo` application). It'd be great if you send a PR or let me know if there's a newer version of the gotk bindings than is used in this repo.

### My application rebuilds from scratch every time, slowing my development cycle

If you need to frequently recompile a non-trivial application for the target environment, rather than simply doing occasional builds for distribution, you will want to preserve the cache of additional packages, to minimise build times.

For now, this is best achieved with a custom Docker image that further extends the gotk-cross-builder image(s), and use that for your builds.

## References

As well as the repositories referenced above, the following sources proved useful along the way:

* <https://stackoverflow.com/a/76440207/13220928>
* <https://medium.com/@tonistiigi/faster-multi-platform-builds-dockerfile-cross-compilation-guide-part-1-ec087c719eaf>
